Vines of Amṛta: A Prayer to the Lineage of the Bodhicaryāvatāra
by Rago Choktrul Tupten Shedrup Gyatso

lama dang gönpo jampé yang la chaktsal lo
Homage to the guru and lord Mañjughoṣa!

sangye kün gyi dröpa chikpü lam
An introduction to the bodhisattvas’ way of life,
changchub sempé chöpa la jukpé
The single path that all awakened buddhas take,
shyung zang gya bö nyi na tsungmé pa
Excellent work without equal in India or Tibet—
ganglé gyüpé lamar solwa deb
Gurus in the lineage of this text, to you I pray!

changchub sem kyi chuter lé trungpé
Born from the ocean of the awakening mind,
tsenpé nyishyön si sum drowé gön
Lord of the three worlds, youthful sun in sign and mark,
namdren gyatsö ü na lhang ngewa
Resplendent and pre-eminent amidst an ocean of guides—
tön chok dön kün drubpar solwa deb
Supreme teacher, Siddhārtha, to you I pray!

gyal kün yab gyur gyalsé shyönnü tsul
Father of all the buddhas, in the form of a youthful prince,
kha dang nyampé yeshe özer chen
With the radiant light of wisdom extending throughout space,
kyegü yi kyi münpa selwé nyi
Like a sun to banish darkness from the minds of beings—
jetsün khyenpé ter la solwa deb
Noble and glorious treasury of wisdom, to you I pray!

jampal pawö jinlab dütsi lung
By drinking from the elixir stream of the inspirational blessings
tung lé khyen nyi langtso rabgyé pé
Of heroic Mañjuśrī, you gained the youth of twofold knowledge,
changchub chöpé shyung zang ganggé gyün
And set in motion this excellent guide to the bodhisattva way,
beb dzé shyiwa lha der solwa deb
So that it flows like the Ganges—noble Śāntideva, to you I pray!

né nga tar sön chok gi ngödrub nyé
Jetāri, who mastered the five branches of knowledge,
dzeta ripa dra lé namgyal dang
Gained the supreme siddhi and conquered the enemy,
palden tsandra kiti chungwé shyab
Glorious and noble Candrakīrti the Lesser,
jowo gu na shri la solwa deb
And Lord Guṇaśrī, to you I pray!

ka na ka shri su ma ti ki ti
Kanakaśrī and Sumatikīrti,
shyenyang penchen dzi na mi tra dang
Together with the great paṇḍita Jinamitra,
nen nam yeshe lu yi gyaltsen sok
Nanam Yeshe Dé,1 Chokro Lüi Gyaltsen,2 and the rest—
ngagyur gyüpa la ang solwa deb
To the gurus of the lineage of Ancient Translations, I pray!

khyepar gangjong rik mé chu gowa
Especially the source of philosophy in this Land of Snows,
sé ché gyal kün gyepé namtar chen
Whose liberative lives delighted all the buddhas and their heirs—
lotsa chenpo loden sherab dang
Great lotsawa Ngok Loden Sherab,3
lobpön jetsün pa la solwa deb
And the master Jetsünpa,4 to you I pray!

tubwang nyipa khé chok bu tönpa
The supreme scholar, like a second lord of sages, Butön Rinchen Drup5
rinchen drub dang tuksé lotsa ba
And Tuksé Lotsawa Rinchen Namgyal,6
khepa yak truk sangye pal dang ni
The learned Yatruk Sangye Pal,7
jetsün sangye pel la solwa deb
And the glorious Sangye Pel,8 to you I pray!

jikten wangchuk dro gön karmé treng
Garland of Karmapas, lords of the world and protectors of beings,
nang du yangdak jokpé lhünpo tön
Upon the lofty peak of perfect meditative placement,9
lung rik nyidé jikten münpa sel
The sun and moon of scripture and reasoning dispel the world’s darkness—
mi kyö dorjé gawar solwa deb
Mikyö Dorje,10 to you I pray!

khyenpé ta jang namkhé tar dro shying
With the emerald steed of wisdom you travelled to the limits of space,
tukjé kyilkhor özer tong barwa
Great solar maṇḍala of compassion blazing with your myriad rays,
shyamar chöpen changwa könchok bang
Wearers of the red-hat crown, Könchok Bang11
chö kyi wangchuk dorjér solwa deb
Chökyi Wangchuk Dorje, to you I pray!

drubgyü gangri po la lek gying shing
Perfectly poised on the summit of the Snowy Land’s practice lineage,
lek shé dong ngé yang kyi sa sum yo
With the melodious roar of excellent explanation, you shook the three worlds,
rigpé wangchuk jangchok pandita
Powerful lord of reasoning, paṇḍita of the northern direction,
jamyang sar du shyepar solwa deb
Jamyang Sardu Shepa,12 to you I pray!

pekar changwa ngurmik dzinpé gar
Holder of the white lotus emanating in saffron robes,
tsemé tukjé dawa rabgyé pé
With the perfectly full moon of your limitless compassion,
tubten nyingpö chuter pel dzepa
You caused the ocean of essential Buddhist teachings to expand—
karma chakmé shyab la solwa deb
Noble Karma Chakmé,13 to you I pray!

deshek tsuktor chen gyi nampar trul
Emanation of the bliss-gone buddha Śikhin,
zab dön chö kyi gyalpo dzogchenpa
King of the Dharma’s profound meaning, Dzogchenpa,
drubpé wangchuk kham sum drowé kyab
Lord of siddhas, refuge to beings of the three worlds—
pema rigdzin shyab la solwa deb
Noble Pema Rigdzin,14 to you I pray!

gong dé jezung tenpé dzö dzin ching
Follower of the latter who held the treasury of his teaching,
chö kyi gyal nga rab drak nyenpé tam
Sounded the great dharma drum of victory with fine discourse,
yichen dü tré na lung dzejé pa
And graced the hearing of assemblies with his words—
namkha ösal shyab la solwa deb
Noble Namkha Ösel,15 to you I pray!

drubpé wangchuk sang sum namrol ba
Display of the three secrets of the lord of siddhas,
puljung khé dang drubpé namtar yik
Your life of learning and accomplishment was like a jewel,
zuk su gyur na namkha dok zöpa
Which, in form, would test the capacity of space itself—
tek chok tendzin shyab la solwa deb
Noble Tekchok Tenzin,16 to you I pray!

khyen tsé nü pé wangchuk tukjé chen
Compassionate lord of wisdom, love and power,
shé dang drubpé tenpa sal dzepa
You light up the teachings through explanation and practice,
khedrub chenpo tashi gyatso dang
Magnificently learned and accomplished Tashi Gyatso,17
khenchen rigdzin zangpor solwa deb
And great khenpo Rigdzin Zangpo,18 to you I pray!

domtsön ngurmik dzinpé gö zang tser
Upon the fine saffron-coloured robes of an observer of vows,
changchub sem kyi norbü tok dzepa
You attached the perfect adornment of the jewel of bodhicitta,
lekpar shepa dögü chok jin khen
And with your excellent explanation bestowed the supreme gift—
pema tashi shyab la solwa deb
Noble Pema Tashi,19 to you I pray!

jikten mik chik namnang lotsa bé
Magical emanation of the single eye of the world, the translator Vairocana,
gyutrul dul dzin gyatsö khyuchok ché
Great leader, foremost among the oceanic holders of Vinaya,
ngagyur tenpé shingta ka gyurpa
Pioneer of the Ancient Translation teachings and holder of the Kangyur—
shyenpen tayé shyab la solwa deb
Noble Shenpen Tayé,20 to you I pray!

shanti deva rang shyung pelwé lé
Śāntideva, appearing in order to spread his own treatise,
pak nor dün dang jang yön chunyi kyi
As one adorned with the most wondrous qualities
mejung yönten gangchen gyen gyurpa
The seven noble riches and twelve ascetic practices—
jikme chö kyi wangpor solwa deb
Jigme Chökyi Wangpo, to you I pray!

yönten gyatso dampé tsok nam la
Through the virtue of pacing with unshakeable faith
miché depé gom tab gyurwé gé
In these noble beings with their oceanic qualities,
changchub sem kyi gal da nyepé tsok
May the faults that are incompatible with bodhicitta
namyang dak gi gyü la mi kyewar
Never arise in my mindstream,
tö dang tsultrim pakpé nor gyi chuk
And may I be rich with the noble treasures of learning and discipline.
dudzi pang né wenpé ri shyiwar
Renouncing busyness, in the peace of mountain solitudes
den nyi changchub sem la tak gompé
May I always train in bodhicitta according to the two truths
nyurdu gyalwé wangpo tobpar shok
And swiftly attain the level of the lord of victors!

Thus, in order to increase my own positive actions of speech, I, Tupten Shedrup Gyatso, wrote
this and prayed all at once. May its meaning be perfectly fulfilled! Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.
↑ sNa nam ye shes sde.↑ Cog ro klu’i rgyal mtshan.↑ rNgog blo ldan shes rab, 1059–1109.↑ Drakpa
Gyaltsen (Grags pa rgyal mtshan, 1147–1216.)↑ Bu ston rin chen grub, 1290–1364.↑ Rin chen
rnam rgyal, 1318–1388.↑ g.Yag phrug sangs rgyas dpal, 1350–1414.↑ Jamchen Rabjampa Sangye
Pel (byams chen rab ’byams pa sangs rgyas ’phel, 1412–1485).↑ nang du yang dag ’jog pa;
pratisaṃlayana.↑ The Eighth Karmapa, Mikyö Dorje (mi bskyod rdo rje, 1507–1554).↑  The Fifth
Shamar dkon mchog ’bangs, alias Könchok Yenlak (dkon mchog yan lag, 1525–1583).↑ As made
clear in Karma Chakmé’s Mountain Dharma (ri chos) this is another name for the Sixth Shamar,
Chos kyi dbang phyug, 1584–1630↑ Karma chags med, 1613–1678.↑ First Dzogchen Rinpoche,
Padma rig ’dzin, 1625–1697.↑ First Dzogchen Pönlop, Nam mkha’ ’od gsal, d. 1726.↑ Second
Dzogchen Rinpoche, Gyurme Tekchok Tenzin Pal Zangpo (’gyur med theg mchog bstan ’dzin dpal
bzang po, 1699–1758).↑ bKra shis rgya mtsho, b. 1714.↑ Minling Gyalse Rigdzin Zangpo (smin
gling rgyal sras rig ’dzin bzang po).↑ Sengtruk Pema Tashi (seng phrug padma bkra shis,
b. 1798).↑ i.e., Gyalse Shenpen Thaye (rgyal sras gzhan phan mtha' yas, 1800–1855).